A Protocol to Exposure Path Analysis for Multiple Stressors Associated with Cardiovascular
Disease Risk: A Novel Approach Using NHANES Data
Jiangling Liua,1
, Ya Liua,1
, Banyun Zhenga,1, Longjian Liub,2
, Heqing Shena,2
1Jiangling Liu, Ya Liu and Banyun Zheng contributed equally to this work.
2To whom correspondence may be addressed.
Author affiliations: aState Key Laboratory of Vaccines for Infectious Diseases, Xiang An Biomedicine
Laboratory & State Key Laboratory of Molecular Vaccinology and Molecular Diagnostics, School of
Public Health, Xiamen University, Xiamen, 361102, China; bDepartment of Epidemiology and
Biostatistics, Dornsife School of Public Health, Drexel University, Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA.
Corresponding authors:
Heqing Shen, School of Public Health, Xiamen University, 4221-117 Xiang’an South Road, Xiamen,
361102, China; Email: hqshen@xmu.edu.cn.
ORCID of the author: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6544-4919.
Longjian Liu: Drexel University, Longjian.Liu@Drexel.edu
Jiangling Liu: Xiamen University, liujiangling@stu.xmu.edu.cn
Ya Liu: Xiamen University, 32620221150850@stu.xmu.edu.cn
Banyun Zheng: Xiamen University, zhengbanyun@stu.xmu.edu.cn
Declaration of competing financial interests (CFl): The authors of this manuscript hereby declare that
there are no financial or personal relationships with other people or organizations that could
inappropriately influence or bias the content of this paper. There are no competing financial interests to
disclose.
1
Abstract
Background: Multiple medical and non-medical stressors, along with the complicity of their exposure
pathways, have posted significant challenges to the epidemiological interpretation of the non-
communicable diseases, including cardiovascular disease (CVD).
Objective: To develop a protocol for deconstructing the complex exposure pathways linking various
stressors to adverse outcomes and to elucidate the sequential determinants contributing to CVD risk in
depth.
Methods: In this study, we developed a Path-Lasso approach, rooted in Adaptive Lasso regression, to
construct the network and paths to interpret the determinants of CVD in an in-depth way by using data
from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES). Univariate logistic regression
was initially employed to screen out all potential factors of influencing CVD. Then a programmed
approach, using Path-Lasso technique, stratified covariates and established a causal network to predict
CVD risk.
Results: Age, smoking and waist circumference were identified as the most significant predictors of
CVD risk. Other factors, such as race, marital status, physical activity, cadmium exposure and diabetes
acted as the intermediary or proximal variables. All these stressors (or nodes) formed the network with
paths (or edges to link the CVD), in which the latent layer variables that causally associate to the outcome
are linearly formed by the stressors in each layer.
Discussion: The Path-Lasso approach revealed the epidemiological pathways, linking covariates to CVD
risk, which is instrumental in elucidating the inter-covariate transitions of their predication to the
outcome, and providing the hierarchal network for foundation of the assessment of CVD risk and the
beyond.
Keywords: Path-Lasso; Adaptive Lasso regression; Path Analysis, Cardiovascular disease
2
1 Introduction
The medical and non-medical stressors that predict the risk of a specific disease or adverse health
outcome is usually multivariable and interactive. From a broad vision, a stressor can be any factor to
which a human is exposed, from the point of contact between the stressor and receptor, moving inward
into the human body and outward to the general environment, including the ecosphere. This means that
the exposure pathways can be traced to the ecologic level, community level, or the individual level1
.
Since a stressor can be any physical, chemical and biological entity or socioeconomic condition that
induces an adverse response, the World Health Organization (WHO) defines social determinants of
health (SDOH) as the factors influencing health outcomes. All determents together form the source-to-
outcome continuum for human exposure, which can also be categorized at multiple levels, including
different groups or within an individual from the internal exposure to the target-sites. The multiple
stressors are often hierarchically organized based on their common action on the defined outcome. For
example, alcohol consumption are generally unhealthy that can work as the negative factor, increasing
the risk of over 60 diseases2
. Genome-wide association study (GWAS) has identified that certain single-
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), such as ADH1B (rs1229984), KLB (rs13130794), BTF3P13
(rs144198753), GCKR (rs1260326), SLC39A8 (rs13107325) and DRD2 (rs11214609), that are related
to the excessive consumption of alcohol. It is also well-known that the distribution of SNPs varies by
race and ethnicity. For example, ADH1B and other ADH and ALDH variants associated with alcohol
consumption occur at low frequencies among populations of European ancestry but are more common
in populations of East Asian ancestry3
. Given exposure to alcohol can directly impact human health, the
internal factors of SNPs can directly modify the alcohol risk that associate the diseases via excessive
alcohol consumption, and the racial identity can modify the distribution of SNPs. A simplified pathway
can be drawn from race to SNPs to disease in a population. Meanwhile, alcohol consumption can be
influenced by many other factors, such as personal habits, economic status, traditional culture, and so on.
In the context of any stressor that increases the risk of adverse outcome, distal stressors may
hierarchically regulate proximal ones. This means that information, such as variable variation, can flow
from the upstream stressor to downstream stressors along these pathways. Mapping these pathways
would be useful for public health prevention. Basically, the follow of information from stressor to stressor
toward a health outcome indicates some redundant. In other words, downstream variable transit the same
information, at least partially the same, to the outcome as the upstream variable. Therefore, the redundant
analysis of the multiple variables’ association to the same outcome will be meaningful to address the
potential pathways. Given the multiple stressor crosstalk in prediction of the same outcome, the
information flux from stressor to stressor also suggests a causal network.
